Remind me this. OK, great. Yeah,
hopefully we are in the recap part.
So.
OK.
So, uh, we said that I mean,
uh, if this is a part of
the code from the parents,
the parent can define any variable.
I mean, before fork can.
And then do the fork when the fork happens.
Exact copy of the whole code lines of
a parent gonna be copied in another
space of the memory for the child,
so the child can have all these
defined variables and also the code
lines that are assigned to the child.
In the run time,
based on the return PID of the fork,
we can distinguish that which lines
going to be reached by the child,
which line going to be reached by the parent.
So this is the generation model
that we discussed before.
So and this way of passing information
to the child is because of the copy bit
by bit copy of the parent to the child.
So we already discussed this.
Another communication between the child
and the parent happens at the moment
that the child finishes the task.
So one communication happens just
before the fork. I mean just.
Calling the fork makes a copy,
so all The thing is going to be
transferred to the copy going
to be transferred to the child.
This is one communication.
And then after that there is no
communication between child and the
parent up until the last moment that
the child finishes and basically do
a system call and says I'm done.
At this time we said that the parent
if the parent does the wait,
meaning that the pants is waiting
for the child to finish,
and by this system called the Child
says to the kernel that I'm done.
Let's wake up my parents and their
parents gonna be waked up by the kernel.
And this is the I mean last.
I mean communication between
the child and the parent.
So we set that up.
The wait is is not just for the waking
up the parent, but also a way to.
For the child to pass the execution,
I mean a status, meaning that whether the
child terminated successfully and what
is the execution status or abnormally
terminated by some, I mean signals.
So if the parent basically provides
a location for the memory space that
the child puts the status there,
then the child can put the last
status code there.
If the child passed,
I mean doesn't provide any location,
meaning that the child doesn't
the parent doesn't care about the
last communication by the child,
so simply ignores whatever the
child wants to send to the parent.
And we said that if the parent
provides the location,
the communication by the child to
the parent is just two bites,
low and high order.
And in order to see that whether
the child terminated successfully,
there are some macros. We said that.
We can check by this macro we said
what is the difference between
the macro and a function?
So by this macro we can say that
the child exited successfully and
if it is exited successfully,
what was the exact status code?
Or the child terminated abnormally.
By receiving a signal so by
checking this macro,
it just returns true or false if it is true,
meaning that the child terminated abnormally,
and then we can say that what signal
terminated the child abnormally.
What's the number?
So far we don't know why this signal.
Today we are going to discuss what is signal,
but I mean a signal is a way
of terminating a child or any
other process abnormally.
And here is an example.
We already saw this example that basically,
uh, the parent waits for the child
by providing a location and this
location if the child finishes
contains the two bytes of information.
We can use this macro to check
whether the execution was normal.
If it is normal,
we can say that what is the execution status.
So if the child says that I exist.
Zero, the status is zero,
but the termination is still normal.
The child may say that exit,
for instance, 5 is still the
termination of this child is normal.
So it's still its termination is normal.
What the child wants to say that I'm not
finished in a I mean in a successfully,
although I terminated normally,
but it's not a successful termination.
But this is the way that the
child process handles itself.
So, and this is the status code file.
However, if at some point before
the exit by the child process,
something happens that terminated
the child process,
it's an abnormal termination.
Usually happens when the signal
by another process.
So by this macro we can say that.
What caused the abnormal
termination of the child process?
And here is the signal number.
We know.
I mean, we are going to explain
what are these numbers but.
We can say that if something
terminated the child abnormally,
who does that and what was the reason?
And basically,
this macro gives the number of the
signal presence signal number 5.
And we know that this signal causes the
abnormal termination of the charge.
So if you already has this sample code,
if you run this sample code,
you can see that I mean the
child exited successfully.
Normal termination and the exit
code is 0 because the child reaches
this system called and passes 0.
If the child passes one.
But just wanted to show the
parent that something happened,
but this decision is by the child process.
Again, is still the normal termination,
but they exist that is going to be
the value that the child passes.
So there is a huge difference between
normal termination and abnormal termination
in the normal termination is still
we can have different exit status.
But what is signal? What is the
abnormal termination by a signal?
So signal or kind of signaling is
very similar, not the same similar
to the IRQ that we discussed.
I mean in early weeks.
We already said that if a device wanted
to communicate with the processor, it
sends an electrical shock to the processor.
We called that electrical
shock interrupt request.
When the processor received the IRQ,
it goes to the kernel and calls part
of the kernel as called IRQ handler.
IRQ handler,
And these IRQs has a specific numbers.
For instance 0 is for the timer,
one is for the mouse,
two is for the keyboard and etc.
But these are electrical shock,
meaning that they wanted to.
I mean, have the processor
immediately to handle this shot.
So very similar to this signaling we have.
Signaling are shocks,
but not from the hardware,
but from a process to another process.
That's why we call them software interrupts,
so they are not hardware interrupts.
They are software interrupts,
but again their interests.
So it's a kind of harsh communication.
We want to interrupt another process
or kind of sending alarm or warning.
So a signal can happen from the
kernel to all the other processes,
because kernel is the godfather
of all the processes.
A parent can send this signal to the child.
An ancestor process,
I mean, kind of grandfather.
I mean in the higher level of the hierarchy,
can send a signal to the lower
part of the hierarchy.
For instance analysis,
they can send a signal to the grandchildren,
but again signals are
kind of software interrupts.
Very harsh communication, kind of warning.
So in unix.
Uh, the signals are defined and there is a,
I mean a specific set of signals.
You can see that these are different
implementation of the Unix operating system.
Uh, some of these signals are
not implemented, for instance,
JVM for the Java is not
implemented by Linux or Mac OS.
But most of them are supported
by all these operating systems.
This is the standard by the post,
so this is the post standard.
As you can see here.
Some of them are must be implemented
by an operating system to be standard.
So basically these are numbers,
but in order I mean to help us because
memorizing the numbers are difficult also.
We want to give the implementation
of operating system kind of a freedom
to choose any number for a signal.
We usually have a constant for signals.
So these are macros defined,
assigned to a number.
So if you ask me what is the
single board number, I don't know.
You have to check.
I mean the implementation of
your OS or search Internet.
For instance,
signal abort may have the number 5 in Linux
signal alarm may have #6 in Linux and etc.
These numbers may be different
from different operating system,
but the only thing here is that
these constants are always the same
in all the Unix operating systems.
And there is a description in front
of each signal, uh, what's the main?
Application or intention of that signal.
So if a process wants to abort,
another process basically sends
this signal abort to that process.
What happens is that basically the
receiver process is going to be terminated.
Abnormal termination.
You can check all the other signals.
I mean we already saw signal child.
This signal gonna be sent by the
child process to the parent process
with the help of the kernel,
meaning that that I'm done and let's
wake up and we tell the parent to wake up.
And you can see here the default is ignored,
meaning that.
If the parent doesn't do wait,
nothing happens to the parent process.
And all the other these different signals
we are going to touch on some of them.
But again, if you ask me that is it
necessary to memorize all these signals.
The answer is no.
So whenever you think that you want to
see what is the definition of a signal,
you can look it up on Internet or
you can look it up this table.
So, but we are going to know the important
ones and know the concept of signal,
another process.
So do not waste your time to
memorize all these signals,
but some of them are very important.
I'm going to touch on them,
but whenever you need to use
one of the signals,
you can simply look it up on
Internet or by this table.
So there will be a, I mean simple
type of signaling happens by the
shell or terminal to your process.
I'm pretty sure that most
of you use this signal.
So whenever you run a process
and you want to stop the process,
I mean immediately or you think
that the process doesn't do
anything and you want to stop it.
There are two types of signals.
When you press the control C.
It says these sig interrupt
meaning that interrupt signal.
So basically,
this sig interrupt let's back to this,
uh I mean table sig interrupt.
The default action is terminates.
So basically when you press
the control T to the shell,
the shell sends this sig interrupt the
process and terminate that process, abnormal.
Also, you can press control Z.
Press this one,
it sends this sick terminal stop.
To the process and let's see what
is the action. sig terminal stop.
Here is the signal terminal stop.
The default action is stopping the process.
So now the question is that
what is the difference between
the stopping or terminating?
Any idea?
So Daniel basically says that, so let's
see so. Interrupting. Or terminating.
Versus stop it.
So Daniel says that it's stopping.
Just pause it, may.
Sam says that it's stopping is temporary.
And tell me I think is killing the process.
So. The answer is yes.
A terminating meaning that the process is
going to be terminated and the kernel moves.
I mean, removes it from the memory.
But the stopping basically blocks the.
Process the process is still inside
the memory, but it is stopped and
never received any processor ship.
That's the difference.
So in order to just check this,
here is a sample code you can see. I mean,
I will upload this sample code as well.
So in this sample I wanted to see how a
shell provides a signal to the process.
So here's the patent process
that does a fork.
Very similar to our previous examples.
We check the return PID if it is zero,
meaning that we are inside the
child and the child does nothing.
It does busy wait.
In forever loop.
The parent waits on the child.
You see that the parent waits for the
child and the child busy waiting forever.
So basically parent is waiting for the
child and tries does nothing forever.
So these two processes just waiting,
I mean does nothing and just I mean
occupying the memory space, nothing happens.
I mean no, I mean progress.
So if you run this at some point,
you want to stop this process
because nothing going to be happen
by the by the child and the parent.
So if you run this process and
then you press the control C,
the shell provides additional health,
meaning that we stop it.
The shell provides seek terminal.
It's up to the process.
As I said, stopping has a diff.
I mean it's different from terminating.
If you try control C,
However,
it sends the intro second drop and
terminates the process so you can run it,
and on the I mean on your computer
or on the school server and see what
are the difference between control Z
and control C and these two signals.
In order to check the processes
status there is a command by
the Shell PS or process status.
So after you press the control Z,
you can type PS.
And for the PID we have two processes,
one of them is the parent,
one of them is the child and see that.
These processes are still inside
the memory or they are not.
You can see that if you press control,
Z they are still in the memory.
However, if you do the CTRL C,
meaning that sending the second
trap they are not inside the memory
and they're gonna terminated.
So those are very simple signals
by the shell to the process
control Z and control C.
There are other type of important
important signals.
Uh, these three.
Basically, these three signals
are happening because or by
the request of the processor.
So when the processor received
an opcode inside their process,
but that opcode is not a
legal legal opcode. Basically,
the processor says that OK, there are.
There are some problem with this process.
It sends a request to the kernel.
And ask the kernel to wrap it
inside the signal to the process.
So this error by the processor becomes
a signal with the help of the kernel.
And what is the signal the signal
is sick ill or illegal operation?
Another signal by the which is
originated by the processor,
but the kernel sense that signal is
that the sig floating point exception,
meaning that if you do some calculation
in your program that those calculations
end up with some illegal operations,
such as division by zero.
Then the processor asked the kernel
to send a signal to the process and
says that you did something wrong.
Another way is this sig segmentation
a invalid segmentation segmentation.
When your process wants to reach
a memory space that is not part
of that process.
For instance,
inside your code segment you do a jump
to a code segment of another process,
or to a part of the memory inside the kernel.
If you do this,
and because of security or whatever,
the processor ask the kernel that
this process is doing something wrong
with the memory access and the kernel
provides a signal to the process.
This is the signal invalid memory reference.
So in order to see this signal again,
I wrote it very simple.
Example processor signal again.
The processor doesn't send signal.
The processor is a hardware.
Signal is a software interrupt.
The processor ask the kernel to
send the signal to the process.
This is very important.
So here in the child part I
intentionally did this Division 1 / 0.
And then the parents simply does nothing,
just waiting for the child to
finish and checks whether the child
finishes normally or abnormally.
So if you run this a program.
We have a parent process.
We have a child process and the child
process reaches the Division 1 / 0.
This opcode by the processor
actually is an error.
The processor ask the kernel
that send the signal to the a
child process to this process.
And the child process received this signal.
And the default action of this
technology is termination.
As a result, the child terminated abnormally.
And. If you look at this,
these line of code,
the pattern checks whether the child.
Exit it's normally or abnormally.
So basically this if clause
becomes true and this signal
number going to be printed out.
And here is the signal number.
By this signal.
So now the parent knows that
what was the reason behind the
termination of the child process.
Another week and another very,
I mean trivial signal is the seat child.
The child with the help of the
kernel send the signal to the parent.
Basically says the pattern that
I'm done wake up and this signal
the default action is ignored.
However, if the parent does the weight,
the pan wakes up and continues.
OK, if you have any question.
I'm ready to take your questions,
so so far we thought we saw just very
trivial signals by terminal or the
processor with the help of the kernel.
And the child to the parrot.
But now we want to see that is it
possible for any process to send
a signal to an any other process?
But before I tell that any question.
Show me some asks what is an illegal
instruction so we know the type
of signal through this signal.
Yes, by checking the this macro.
Or signal number?
I will explain more about how to know
what is the signal number and set up.
However, if you want to check the.
Signal that the child process receives
this is the macro which basically
says that what is this signal number
of the signal received by the child.
And by knowing the number you can see
that what was that signal and check.
Uh. One of the you said that,
for instance, how it is possible to
have a signal illegal operation.
In the first, uh,
I think it wasn't the second lap.
We said that when you write a C program,
you compile it to the assembly and
then you compile it to the opcode.
He said that there are some way
to hack the opcode if you open
the opcode and change it.
So you may change the 017 opcodes and
if you do it I mean incorrectly then
the opcode when it fetched by the
processor cannot be distinguished,
and then the processor says that
this offer is not valid.
This is one way to receive a seek illegal
if you change the opcode intentionally.
Otherwise,
you normally write a C program and then
if everything if all these statement
in C program compiles successfully,
normally you won't be serious, sick, illegal.
A signal.
Daniel asks is this sick
child the same as the wait?
No, no no no no no.
Wait is a system called,
so let me back. Yeah here.
So wait, is a system called that
basically the pattern asked the
kernel that I want to go to sleep
up until the child finishes.
So this is function or
system called the seat child.
This signals.
See child, This is a signal
that when the child finishes,
the Colonel sends to the parrot.
So basically the parent received
this signal. Also here.
When it is, uh, when it is, uh,
I mean, I mean, in a sleeping mode.
Uh, so this signal wakes up the parent.
So basically this signal when
the parent received this one.
The action is ignoring,
meaning that the parent does do nothing.
The only thing is that the panel
receive this signal does nothing,
but behind the scenes,
the kernel brings the patent
process from the blocking state.
Into the radius state.
So this is just a simple signal to tell
their pattern that your your child is.
I mean done.
So it's just a message by the
kernel to the parent, that's it.
We'll we'll talk about.
Is it possible to catch a
signal and do something else,
or do some processing?
The answer is yes,
but for now the parent received this
sick child and this does nothing,
just simply ignore it.
But behind the scenes,
Colonel actually does the
actual I mean action.
OK, so now, uh again,
signalling is not a good
way of communication.
Basically it's for just urgent or
alarming or something happen ever
happens and we want to tell the
process that you did something wrong.
So it's not a good way of
communication within processes.
So now we want to see that is it possible
for any process to send a signal to
another process and the answer is that
these are the way that a process can
send is signal to another process.
The patent to the chart.
We saw that before an ancestor to
the grandchildren so basically
based on the hierarchy.
If you have a process and then you
have a child and then you have a
child and then you have a child also,
you may have two Childs.
And each child had its own child,
so you are the ancestor and all these.
Children, you can send a signal.
Also, this child can send a signal to
this one and send the signal to this one.
So you have to imagine the tree
structure of the hierarchy and then
the root or the parent node can
send the signal to the child nodes.
Or a powerful process to another process.
What I mean by the powerful process is that,
for instance, the kernel or.
A user that has his,
I mean powerful privilege inside the system.
For instance,
Sudoers are in the Unix based
operating system or Linux.
Uh, an admin of the system?
Uh, I mean,
can act as a super doer,
meaning that it has the I mean powerful
authority to send a signal or terminate
any other process inside the system.
So how it happens by this system called kill?
So that's why you know why I
chose the movie kill Bill.
So in the header file signal that H.
Uh, there is a system called kill.
A process can pass a process
ID of the receiver process.
And the signal number again,
we don't use the actual number,
for instance, one or two or etc.
We usually use the constant forensic int.
These are the constant that are mapped,
then integer numbers.
And then basically the process by doing
this system called send this signal
sick to the process ID PID and then
they returned by the kernel is an integer.
If they kinda does.
Uh, this sending meaning
that this sending is legal.
It returns zero, meaning that.
It's OK that you can send this
signal to the process PID.
However, it returns minus one,
meaning that this sending the
signal was not successful.
The reason is that.
You may provide an invalid
signal for answers you provide.
Signal signal number 100,
which is not the invalid signal.
Or the PID that you provide is
not a valid one, meaning that.
Either the PID is not existed any.
I mean never existed or the process
that you want to send the signal is not
inside the memory it is terminated already.
So there is no PID, an invalid PID.
And the third reason is very important.
You don't have the permission to the DC
to send the signal to the ad process.
One way is that trying to send
a signal to the.
So I have to close the door.
I'm sorry. Second floor.
Just one more screw, thank you.
Sorry guys OK. One way is that I
mean just to try this, you try to
send a signal to the kernel process.
We already said that the
idea of the kernel is 1.
So try to write a code and send these kill.
Meaning that killed doesn't mean
that we want to kill a process.
It's just a system call that we
want to send the signal, but again,
because signals or harsh communication.
That's why they chose this name.
Simply kill one and then seek interrupt.
So you want to. Terminate the kernel process.
Uh, asking the channel itself so.
What would be the return?
Is it illegal or illegal?
Try this.
Probably receive minus one because
you don't have the authority to
send this signal to the Colonel.
And so.
I will provide an example too.
I mean in real situation that how.
I mean we can send the
signal to another process.
But before that, uh,
I have to explain something
called signal handling.
He said that a process can send a signal.
To another process by using
the system called Kill.
The receiver, so we call it a
receiver process. For the receiver
of the Unix operating system,
provide a chance to handle the signal
or to do something about that signal.
For instance, if the child doesn't do
anything, the pattern may try to warn
the child says that do it quickly.
Otherwise, I'm going to kill you.
So the process may send a signal
to the child and the child has the
opportunity to cash the signal and
do something about that signal.
If the child can do something,
then it doesn't receive any more signal.
Otherwise it's a warning.
So actually the child can decide whether
to do it quickly or simply quit or whatever,
so it's a chance to the receiver process
to do something about the signal.
This is called signal handling
by the receiver process and also
called disposition of a signal or an
action associated with the signal.
So basically,
this topic means that the receiver
process has the opportunity to decide
what to do by receiving the signal.
So there are fee. Options for the receiver
signal to act upon receiving a signal.
The first one is just simply ignore it.
So very similar to the parent
process that received the sick
trialdb signal does nothing.
Simply ignore it. However,
there are some signals that if you ignore it,
the default action gonna be happening,
so the sip kill sigstop seek floating
point exception or sticking trap.
These are signals if you don't.
Do anything about them.
If you simply ignore it,
they gotta terminate your process.
So if the receiver doesn't do
anything about this process.
The receiver gonna be terminated.
However, there are some other
signals that if you ignore it,
nothing happens.
The second option for the receiver is that.
Simply, uh, uh.
The default action of that signal happens.
So again, very similar to the first one.
There is some. It does nothing, ignore it,
but the default action happens for the sick.
You'll see interrupt signal stop the
default action in the table gonna
be happen for the receiver process.
Otherwise, based on that table,
I'm going to show you the table,
the default action that is associated
to any signal gonna be executed by
the kernel for that receiver process.
And the third one is very important.
There is super can catch the
signal and handle it properly.
We got this.
The child wants to try itself to
do something about the signal.
So the first and the second option,
ignoring or the default action,
depends on the default action
associated with the signal.
You see, most of the signals.
The default action is termination.
Is the receiver if the receiver
process doesn't do anything?
Receiving these signals
going to be terminated,
gonna terminate the receiver process.
Some of them, these green was.
These are ignoring meaning that if there is,
if it does nothing, nothing happens
to the I mean receiver process.
Basically these green ones
are just warning or alarming,
doesn't do anything.
And there are some yellow bars you see here.
These are stopping the receiver process.
So six stop or terminal stop.
These are stopping the process.
So you have to decide in what
situation what type of signal
you want to send to the process.
If you want to.
If you are a parent process and you
want to give a warning to the chart,
you can simply send those signals that
basically has the default action ignored.
If you want to give a harsh,
I mean a warning to the child,
you can say that I am going to stop you.
So we can send these signals.
So it's stopping process can have the
opportunity to become a ready process.
And this is a good question for you.
How we can bring a stock
process into already process?
And, uh, the turning, I mean these red ones.
If you send these signals and the receiver
process doesn't do anything about them,
the receiver going to be terminated.
If you see it or some other termination
actions followed by core, what is this?
First of all,
this option is not part of the post sex.
But some operating system
provide this additional action,
followed by determination,
which basically means that.
Dump the whole memory image of the process.
Before the termination, why?
Because?
We want to see that what was the reason?
That for that process,
the receiver process.
That what was wrong with that
process that that process received
is signal that terminates the process
and we want to debug the reason.
So this is a very helpful pro.
I mean, uh, I mean.
Uh,
uh,
I mean additional information for debuggers
to find what was the problem with that?
Receiver process.
But again,
it's in memory image.
So basically if you wanna
see what's going on,
these are zero and once we have
to be very I mean at the level of
system programmer to understand the
zero ones inside the memory image.
Just as a reminder,
the memory image of a process
has a code segment.
Has the PS segment has the heat?
And Stack segment and the.
Argument I mean input argument
and the environment variables.
So basically the whole memory space of
the process cannot be dumped into a file.
Historically,
the name of that file was core.
That's why I mean they chose
this name for this action.
But again, this is not part of the POSIX.
If there's an operation doesn't do that
for you, it's still that operating
system is the standard operating system.
OK, now the third option.
Uh, for the failed option.
We don't want to ignore it.
The receiver doesn't want to ignore it.
The receiver doesn't want the
default action happen to the signal.
The receiver process wants to catch
it and do something about that signal.
I mean kind of a responsible child process.
So how we can catch a signal?
In inside the receiver.
Before I explain the catching a signal,
I have to remind you about
something in C program.
Basically a pointer to a function.
Uh. We know that in C program we
can have a pointer to a variable.
For instance,
if you have a variable integer A.
You can have a pointer to that variable,
for instance PTR,
and then you can say that
this address this pointer.
Has the address of the variable.
So if you do this,
you can simply use the name of
the variable to assign the number
to that variable, or you can.
Uh, refer to the memory location
of that variable,
so you can say that I want to go to
the memory location of this address.
And make it 10.
If you look up the variable by its address,
it's called a pointer.
And this is variable, so this is inside the.
The data segment of the I mean
memory space of the process,
for instance.
So very similar happens for the functions.
A function cap can have a pointer.
So we know that all the functions
are opcodes and there are going
to be in the code segment.
As a result,
not only you cannot call
a function by its name,
but also you can call a function by
its address inside the code segment.
How this is possible?
This is the way you can do if you
have a function, for instance,
this wave function name.
I don't know function function a.
This is the name of the function.
The return type of the function is this,
for instance they return is integer.
And these are the argument
to the input of the function.
For instance,
the first argument of type this.
For instance,
in a the second argument of type one,
for instance karabi and, etc.
If you want to create a pointer or an,
keep the address of the function,
you have to define a pointer like.
A like this a pointer to
an integer very variable.
You have to define a pointer to function.
How you can define this A is based on this.
The same return type.
In name for the pointer.
It could be any name BC whatever,
but I mean I put function pointer.
And then.
Before that you have to put a star,
meaning that this is a pointer or an address.
Sorry, a location that keeps the address and.
Followed by the data type of the arguments,
not the name of the arguments,
just the data type.
So here we have integer and care.
So here you have to pass Ints and cat,
so the name of the variable doesn't.
Is not needed. So when you do that,
you are telling the system that you're
telling the compiler that I'm going
to have a location and this location
can keep an address of a function,
and that function has.
Data type in the input integer and car.
And the return type is this,
for instance. Integer.
So any function that has input
type of integer or car and
hasn't returned type of integer.
Can save the address inside this pointer.
So here is an example.
I wrote a function say hi.
Just basically it prints out
in number of times the high.
So if you pass five it prints
out high five times.
So here is the example.
So I called say hi three times
and it prints out hi three times.
So this is the calling of
the function by its name.
But now I want to create a
pointer and call the function by
its address or by its pointer.
First of all, you have to
define a location that keeps
address of the function.
So the return type is void,
as you can see here.
The input argument of type integer.
And here is the name of the
location that keeps track of
the address and then before that
you have the start element.
Now after this line you have
a pointer that can store.
The address of any function
that has an input of integer and
output return type of void.
Any function?
You cannot keep the address of a
function that has two arguments.
Only one argument as of five
integer and the return type is void.
Another next is that you have to
keep the address of the function.
Basically you have to say
that the name of the function.
Contains the address of the function,
so the address goes to this location.
And then you can call the
function now by its address.
Function .8 gives the address of the
function and then you passed in value.
So now you can call this same
function by its address.
So why this is important?
If you want to catch a signal.
You have to provide a function and
then register the address of that
function to the kernel or subscribe that
function to the kernel by its address.
So very similar when you want to subscribe
to a newspaper or to an I mean advertisement,
you have to put your email
or your home address.
That company will basically subscribe
your address to that company.
Here is the set.
The receiver process should subscribe
the address of a function to the kernel.
And says that I want to catch this signal.
How this subscription happens?
This is the way.
Basically this is a system called signal.
It accepts an integer.
Which is basically the signal number which
signal number the receiver wants to catch.
And if the receiver process
catches that signal,
what function wants to manipulate
or handles that a signal?
And this is the address of that function that
the receiver process wants to subscribe.
Their return is the address
of the old function.
You you may subscribe and old address and
then you want to replace it by a new address.
So the return of this system
called is the old address.
Also,
you need to have this typedef
a lines of code.
So if this subscription happens
and successfully at the kernel,
the return is simply.
The address of the old one,
otherwise it to Colonel returns this error.
Sick error this is not a signal,
this is just the constant.
Function others with antifungal and actually.
Basically, it says that you
couldn't subscribe your function
for that signal to the character.
So again, this is a void.
Point function is not in constant number.
So now I just wanted to expand sending
the signal and then catching the
signal by the receiver in one example.
Before I explain this example, any question.
No questions.
So I feel like I need
you to send me feedbacks.
At least I'll make sure that you
have the focus to this slide.
Thank you Sir. Thank you Danielle Zainab.
Look Michelle. Lindsay Nathan Victor
That was Ben 6 sleepy.
What is the default action for that?
Should I ignore it or catch it?
So that's a good example so we can
write a catcher to CAT6 sleeping?
Thank you yeah yeah,
thank you my son yeah.
So, but I mean I receive,
I think about 10 but we have 38 students.
So. Either you wake up your,
I mean your friends.
Some way, thank you, John Hoy.
How about others? I mean, Seth, Sooraj,
Tommy? We have a Randy Radoslav
Jonathan got huge and I got you so.
So I'm trying to wake you up.
I'm sending signals.
OK, so let's see the example.
This example is very good.
I mean not a good example,
but it's showcase the benefit
of these sending the signal
and also catching a signal.
So I need your attention.
So here is the scenario.
We have the parents.
That has a child.
And basically this pattern does nothing,
just wanted to do checking or
follow up on the task of the child.
So basically ask the child
to do the task quickly,
or I mean just asking the child to hurry up.
The child catches the signals
or warnings from the parents and
tries to do the task quickly.
If the child cannot do anything,
simply quit and says that I cannot
do quickly, so I quit and exit.
But here a child decides to terminate, not.
I mean, uh, I mean,
the signal terminates the child abnormally.
The child says that I catch,
I cannot do anything.
So I decided to quit.
So you see the difference.
The child has the opportunity to.
I mean,
select the suicide kind of thing.
OK, so here is an example.
So as normal we have a parent
that does the fork and as a
result if the fork is successful,
the child PID if the child PID is zero,
meaning that we are in the child part.
If it is not a zero and
it is greater than zero,
meaning that that's the PID of the child,
so we are inside the patent process.
And these are the tasks of the parrot.
Actually, the powers does nothing.
As I said, it just simply said
that I sleep for 10 seconds.
And here's the system called the slip.
We haven't used it before,
but it's very simple just.
Puts the process inside the uh,
blocking step for 10 seconds and
after that it brings it to the
ready state so it blocks the color,
which here is the parrot into
10 seconds sleep.
And then after 10 seconds the.
Parents wakes up,
goes to the radius state by the
kernel and simply check on the child.
By sending a very I mean kind
of warning or very very call.
I mean kind signal.
Signal you, I mean, user defined.
This is USR,
meaning that user defined signal.
The default action is ignored,
we just wanted to give a warning
to the child that what's going on.
So we send a signal kill.
To the child process,
and this is a very I mean a.
Uh, I mean kind signal to the child.
And then, uh, the child catches.
That will show how the
child catches that, and etc.
If the child doesn't do anything, they.
Patent says that OK,
I sleep for another 10 seconds.
And then it goes to sleeping and
after 10 seconds it wakes up and
follow up on the child again.
Just to ask the child that
did you do anything?
Was there any progress and etc. And then,
uh, the last time the child says that.
OK, this is your last opportunity.
What's up?
Could you finish the task and etc.
And says that I go for another sleep,
but this is the last time.
And then after the past wakes up,
send another follow up.
And then, uh, waits for the child.
Basically this talent quits, I mean,
falling upon the child says that
I don't follow up on you anymore.
I just wait for you to finish the task.
So you see here the pattern does nothing,
just follow up on the child and
after some free photo OPS, it quits.
Simply goes to the waiting step
forever up until the child finishes.
So this is the way that you can
send the signal to any process.
So basically system called kill the
idea of the process and the constant
for this signal that you want to
send this signal to the process.
But the important part part is the receiver.
So now we want to.
Catch this signals by the
pattern inside the child.
For doing that as the first step is that
we have to define a function to catch a
signal to do something about the signal.
Then we have to subscribe it to the kernel.
Meaning that we tell the kernel that
whenever we receive this signal,
this function gonna handle it.
And then the last part is that.
Does the normal tasks that are given
to the child so these two just
for signal catching and handling
but the last part is just a normal
task that is given to the child?
So the first step we write a function
I I put this name child signal handler.
You can put any name.
But this is important.
The handler must have one single input,
only one single input as of type integer.
Basically it shows what single what
signal this function want to handle.
So always one single argument
as of type integer.
The return type must be void.
So the function that is going to handle
the signal must have a return type void.
And here is the handler.
Basically the child when it receives
a signal says that I receive a signal
from my parent and here is the idea
of my parent PID parent process ID.
And then basically it prints out
what is the number of the signal.
And then here's the part.
The child gives itself two chances.
If the first signal receives the signal
counter is still 2 is not lower than zero,
it goes to this part and says that OK,
I received one single warning.
But still I have another,
I mean two more chances.
So let's finish something.
This is a simple I mean command statement.
You can do anything here.
You can write a lot of statements here
to do the task quickly or whatever.
And then the child, uh,
I mean, reduce its chance.
The second signal,
still it goes to the else part because it
is it becomes one which is greater than 0.
The 3rd signal it becomes 0.
And in this third signal,
the child says that sorry,
Ma,
I couldn't finish it and also you
can provide some excuse to the parents.
Uh,
this I mean simply said I cannot
doesn't give me enough processor
to finish my task and etc.
So these are just excuses by the child.
And then it says that I quit
and then finishes normally but
with the exit status non zero.
So basically says I quit.
I wanted to finish.
I wanted to commit suicide.
Uh, but this I mean exit, the status is 1.
Meaning that I couldn't finish the tasks,
but I terminate success,
I mean normally.
So this is a very just a simple handler
just to showcase the handling a signal.
After defining the handler,
you have to register it to the kernel.
Inside the tasks of the child,
those parts that are reached by the child.
So in the L spot,
basically here we have the chart.
The chart should subscribe that function.
So basically use the name of the function.
Which contains the address of the function.
And then pass the address to the
kernel by the system called signal.
And tells the kernel that this function
is going to handle what signal,
and here is this signal #6 user one.
So after doing this,
only this sick user one gonna
be handled by this function.
All the other signals is not going to
be handled by this, only this signal.
If this subscription subscription
is successful, the return type is.
The address is not this.
If it is not successful,
they cannot return this error and
simply says that you can your
subscription because is not accepted.
As a result you if it is not successful,
we cannot catch this signal.
And here is the task given to the child.
So the child does nothing,
basically just wasted processor share.
It's a busy waiting for this is for example,
but I mean in a real setting
you can do a lot of task.
Very complicated task here.
But this line is very important.
This is the registration part for the child.
And then here's the task done by the child,
so it registers the handler and then
continues with the task given to the child.
And if it is finish it. It runs exist,
but we know that this is a busy waiting,
meaning that it never ends.
And let's see a, I just wanted to run it
in the real time so you have the feeling.
So this is the output of the process.
Uh, but you have to build it and right to
fill this, sending the signal by the pattern
and catching the signal by the child.
So in order to show that a again you already,
I will upload this sample.
You can run it on your computer.
So let me, I already built that.
And, uh. I just want to run it.
So if you run this program.
At first the parents is that on the lonely
one and then it created do it does the
forking after forking the processor,
child receives the processor.
The palace says that I sleep for 10
seconds and goes with 10 seconds.
You see here,
it sends the signal to the child.
The child receives this signal.
I receive the signal from my parents.
The signal is 10. I have two more chances.
And then does the busy waiting.
After 10 seconds,
the parent wakes up and sent another
signal signal user one which is number 10.
Again, the child receives the signal.
Says this is the time.
I have two more chances.
And then goes to. This does nothing.
The third time the parent wakes
up and then says that what's up
child and send another signal.
The child process received the signal.
And then says that the signal is time.
I have one more chance. And then.
Uh. I think receives signal.
So 2.
Usually the I mean the last
signal. Let's try it again.
So the pattern goes to the
way I mean, sleeping state.
And then wakes up and send its signal.
So this is the wakes up so we
stop and send another signal.
The child received the signal and
says I have two more chances.
Japan wakes up send another signal child
catch it and says I have one more chances.
Again, Japan wakes up send another signal.
It gets caught by the child,
but the child doesn't have any
opportunity says that I cannot do it.
And then terminates.
So again normal termination,
but the exit status is 1,
the number that passed by the child.
So let's try it again.
So you see, when the patent which stops
and the signal the charge catch it and then
says that how many chances I have. Again,
the pattern wakes up send another signal,
the child catches catch that signal
and says that how many chances I have.
The last signal that receives by the
chart says that I don't have any chance.
I quit and then exit with one.
So if you want to see the code.
Here is the code so.
It goes to this slip and
after weeks of one signal,
two signal and the 3rd signal
gonna end up the I mean
the child quit and then.
Exit with. One here.
So you see, the child has
its normal tasks here.
But it has a function that
handles the signal which is not
part of the task of the child.
It is defined as a function here.
But it is called as a
part of the child process.
When the child receives this signal.
So you see, the child has two parts.
The task inside defined by the I mean,
parents, normal tasks and also the function
that catches the signal and does something.
So there are some question here.
What happens if the child finishes sooner?
If the child finishes so that
I mean at the first sleeping
moment for the parent that it,
then the parent goes to sleep for 10 seconds.
What if the child finishes
the task less than 10 seconds?
And when the pattern wakes up,
it sends a signal to the child,
but the child.
Doesn't exist. So what happens
to the closest a system call?
He said that if the PID is not valid,
it retains minus one.
So basically nothing happens
that sees I mean invalid signal
to a process that doesn't exist.
Another question is that
what if you want to catch?
I mean other signals.
For instance signal user two.
For instance signal interrupt
signal abort all those signals.
We have the opportunity character signals.
We have to write a function to
handle each of those signals or.
There's another way you can define
one function, but the register that
function four different signals.
I leave that as he, I mean practice for you.
So basically that back to discuss gear.
We registered this function
for only this signal.
Is it possible to register this
function for another signal?
For instance, said user two or seek.
Word or seek illegal.
Uh, the answer is yes.
How, again?
Very easy,
but I mean you can search about that.
There is an exception,
a sick, ill and sick stop.
Cannot be ignored.
Cannot be caught by any receiver process.
This is an exception.
If any process received these two signals,
that process gonna be either stopped
or gonna be terminated abnormally.
So basically, in this example we cannot put.
Sick a stop or sick kill?
For this function.
The channel doesn't accept this
registration for those two signals.
And, uh.
So in the remaining minutes I want
to give you another example that the
child basically ignores the signal.
In the previous example,
you saw that at least the child wants
to do something, and if the child
cannot do anything at the child,
decides to simply suicide or quit and exit,
terminate normally, but with exit
status of one or non zero value.
In this example,
I want to give you an example of
a chart that doesn't listen to the
parent and simply just ignores whatever
alarm or signal by the parent.
So. Here is the signal handler by the child.
Basically you see here the signal
handler simply says that I
received a signal from my parents
and here is the signal number.
But I don't care about that.
Basically just print out receiving
the signal but does nothing.
But the parents. Says that I send
you a signal to check on you.
I send you a second one to
check on you and I send you the
3rd signal to check on you and
then if you do not do anything.
I don't wait forever for you.
I just simply kill you.
So this is a way that I mean a parent
has the authority over the child after
some giving some signal warning simply,
I mean kill their parents.
So this is a difference.
But I mean the difference here is that
the parent kills the child process and the
child process termination is abnormal.
And this signal number is 6 interrupt.
For example,
the child terminates success.
I mean normally, but they exist.
Success was non zero.
So if you run this program,
uh, I can write for you.
Again, I upload this a.
So let me clear the cliches.
So the first one actually the parent,
goes to sleep. And it wakes up
and send a signal to the child.
And the child received that and
simply said that I receive it,
and the signal is 10.
I don't care about that.
They parent goes to another sleep
after 10 second it wakes up send
another signal says that what's up?
The choices that I received
this I don't care about that.
And then the last month after this
second sleep, the panel wakes up,
says that you don't care about.
I mean my signals. I kill you.
And it said the sick and shop to the chart.
The second drop is not going to
be cashed by the child because it
only it was only registered for
the sick user one. As a result,
the child cannot catch this signal,
and 10 minutes abnormally.
And the signal is number
2 for the sick interrupt.
Makes us. You see?
Uh, it still had the communication
between the processes,
but this type of communication
is kind of harsh or kind of
warning or killing each other.
So. This way of communication, as I said,
is a software shock or interrupt.
Usually used for the urgent communication,
for instance, a pattern wants to
tell this child that hurry up.
If you don't do anything,
I'm going to kill you or something.
Invalid happens and they
cannot send it a signal or etc.
So, however, we want a better
communication between processes.
Uh, we want to have a normal communication.
Without any warning or without any killing.
So this type of communication is
called interprocess communication IPC.
Signaling is still IPC,
but because that's a very
harsh working question,
we don't consider an IPC.
I mean in a philosophical definition.
Signal is an IPC, but in a practical
sense we never use signal as an IPC.
IPC is usually used for
a normal communication.
For instance,
a parent asked a child that can
you do this for me in a kind way,
and the child may accept or
may reject it if it accepts.
The child may say that.
Is there anything else for me to do so?
It's a kind communication with him processes.
And we don't have enough time for camp.
I mean continuing this communication.
Next section, I mean Next up session.
I will introduce how.
In normal communication,
can happen within two processes.
Apparent child,
the kernel and the other processes,
or an ancestor with the grandchild process.
Basically,
in the lab 09.
You need this type of communication.
And, uh, even if I don't explain
this topic, you can come up
with a better idea by yourself.
That's a good practice for you
up until next session that
how a normal communication can
happen between two processes.
OK, we are done and I'm ready
to take your questions.
So we have a question from Victor,
doesn't the first kill child
call terminated child processor?
Shots are active.
Oh wait a second.
You see the first three.
Uh, I mean system calls.
These are sick user.
So although this system call
is called Kill as I said,
although this system called is kill.
But it doesn't kill.
Basically it depends on
the signal that you pass.
If this signal that you
pass is a sick interrupt,
it kills the process.
But this signal user doesn't
kill the process.
Basically,
if you go back to the table.
Show you this, yeah?
These two signals these are
called user defined signals.
Basically the default action is terminate
and in that it kills the process.
However, the child process can catch it.
When the child process can catch it, the
default action is not going to be happening.
So that's why the child person doesn't.
I mean, it's not terminated by the 1st.
Uh, I mean uh by the 5th system calls.
So this is very important.
It let me back to. Maybe that's the reason.
Back to.
Yeah here let me clean this.
Uh, again, although the
system called name is killed.
It's not. I mean it doesn't
necessarily kill the receiver.
It depends on the signal that you
send to the process and whether
the receiver catches or not.
So I mean, this is very I mean important.
The receiver. Has the opportunity to
ignore or lead it as a default action,
so then we have to see the look up table and
what is the default action for that signal.
However, if there is severe catch that
signal so it changes the default action.
It depends on the receiver.
Maybe it ignores it,
or maybe it does something about that so.
This is a good example,
so we know that actually.
We know that the default action for
SIG user one and two is termination.
However, in our example,
the child process caught those signals.
So let me back.
See here. The child process write
a function to catch those signals.
As a result, the child decides
whether to terminate or not.
The only signal that he cannot
catch it is are these two signals.
Any other signals, whether they
have a default action or not.
If they are caught by the child process,
it depends on the child process,
how to act upon those signals.
Makes sense. Victor.
So maybe some ask where we should put
the signal handler, whether it is
inside the child or or it's a function.
So you can define in any part
of the code, but usually it is.
I put it in my example. I put it in.
Top so let me open my a.
So before the main function
I define this function.
As a global variable, this and then
inside the child I register that.
So this is a way that you can define a
function and register it, so this is.
Part of the parents,
but at the time of forking it becomes
a copy to the child so the child
can have this function as well.
Both the parent and the child hazard,
but only the child registered at
the parent doesn't register that.
Yeah, it's just a normal function,
yeah? But The thing is that
the only difference is that.
Has only one single argument of type
integer and the return type must be void.
Yeah.
Oh, about the lab.
Nine other thing is that there was a problem
with the Lab 9 and the problem was that.
Told me go back the IPC here.
In the lab line, we have a parent.
And we have the child.
The child does some processing.
Basically it outputs the multiplication
of a number with each row in
your assignment with each color.
So for instance it creates 5 for the
first column, it creates 620 second,
third second column and create
seven for the third column.
However, these numbers should
be passed to the parents and the
parents write down the final matrix.
But we said that we can.
I mean, if you do that,
or the parent doesn't know about
567 because the memory space of
the child and the memory space
of the parents totally different.
So what would we what would
be your suggestion?
The suggestion would be the child
can install these values somewhere.
But where?
I think you can do that even
without the knowledge of IPC.
Actually, when we start the IPC.
We come up with the idea
that you already know that.
So IPC is not just in new idea,
it is a re using that whatever we
have learned so far for the IPC.
You remember or we can
store anything in a file.
So I'm giving you the answer.
So you can have the child process
can restore the result in a file and
the parent process can open that
file and see the result of the child.
OK, if you did that without using the file
that's there are multiple ways to do IPC,
but the easiest way with using the file.
There are other ways, so I have.
I mean you have to see what
ways you used for this.
But normally they should.
I mean you have to find a way
to provide the communication
within child and the parent.
The easiest way is just using the storage.
But there are other ways.
No worries any other questions.
OK, so if you have if you
don't have any question,
I'm going to stop the recording.
You too Mason.
You too Yahya have a great.